=== Bhagavad Gita: Chapter 4, Verse 2 ===


एवं परम्पराप्राप्तमिमं राजर्षयो विदु: |
स कालेनेह महता योगो नष्ट: परन्तप || 2 ||

evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣhayo viduḥ
sa kāleneha mahatā yogo naṣhṭaḥ parantapa


== Word Meanings ==

evam — thus
paramparā — in a continuous tradition
prāptam — received
imam — this (science)
rāja-ṛiṣhayaḥ — the saintly kings
viduḥ — understood
saḥ — that
kālena — with the long passage of time
iha — in this world
mahatā — great
yogaḥ — the science of Yog
naṣhṭaḥ — lost
parantapa — Arjun, the scorcher of foes


== Translation ==

O subduer of enemies, the saintly kings thus received this science of Yog in a continuous tradition. But with the long passage of time, it was lost to the world.


== Commentary ==

In the descending process of receiving divine knowledge, the disciple understands the science of God-realization from the Guru, who in turn received it from his Guru. It was in such a tradition that saintly kings like Nimi and Janak understood the science of Yog. This tradition starts from God himself, who is the first Guru of the world.
tene brahma hṛidā ya ādi-kavaye muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ  (Bhāgavatam 1.1.1)[v1]
God revealed this knowledge at the beginning of creation in the heart of the first-born Brahma, and the tradition continued from him. Shree Krishna stated in the last verse that he also revealed this knowledge to the Sun God, Vivasvan, from whom the tradition continued as well. However, the nature of this material world is such, that with the passage of time, this knowledge got lost. Materially-minded and insincere disciples interpret the teachings according to their blemished perspectives. Within a few generations, its pristine purity is contaminated. When this happens, by his causeless grace, God reestablishes the tradition for the benefit of humankind. He may do so, either by himself descending in the world, or through a great God-realized Saint, who becomes a conduit for God’s work on Earth.
Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj, who is the fifth original Jagadguru in Indian history, is such a God-inspired Saint who has reestablished the ancient knowledge in modern times. When he was only thirty-four years old, the Kashi Vidvat Parishat, the supreme body of 500 Vedic scholars in the holy city of Kashi, honored him with the title of Jagadguru, or “Spiritual Master of the world.” He became the fifth Saint in Indian history to receive the original title of Jagadguru, after Jagadguru Shankaracharya, Jagadguru Nimbarkacharya, Jagadguru Ramanujacharya, and Jagadguru Madhvacharya. This commentary on the Bhagavad Gita has been written based upon its insightful understanding, as revealed to me by Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj.

