=== Bhagavad Gita: Chapter 10, Verse 25 ===


महर्षीणां भृगुरहं गिरामस्म्येकमक्षरम् |
यज्ञानां जपयज्ञोऽस्मि स्थावराणां हिमालय: || 25 ||

maharṣhīṇāṁ bhṛigur ahaṁ girām asmyekam akṣharam
yajñānāṁ japa-yajño ’smi sthāvarāṇāṁ himālayaḥ


== Word Meanings ==

mahā-ṛiṣhīṇām — among the great seers
bhṛiguḥ — Bhrigu
aham — I
girām — amongst chants
asmi — I am
ekam akṣharam — the syllable Om
yajñānām — of sacrifices
japa-yajñaḥ — sacrifice of the devotional repetition of the divine names of God
asmi — I am
sthāvarāṇām — amongst immovable things
himālayaḥ — the Himalayas


== Translation ==

I am Bhrigu amongst the great seers and the transcendental Om amongst sounds. Amongst chants know Me to be the repetition of the Holy Name; amongst immovable things I am the Himalayas.


== Commentary ==

While all fruits and flowers grow from the same land, only the best amongst them are selected for an exhibition. Similarly, everything that is manifest and unmanifest in the universe is the glory of God, but the prominent amongst them are singled out for mention as his opulence.
Amongst the sages in the celestial planes of existence, Bhrigu is special. He possesses wisdom, glory, and devotion. Lord Vishnu holds the mark of his foot on his chest as a consequence of a divine pastime described in the Puranas in which Bhrigu tested the trinity of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiv. Shree Krishna’s glory is revealed best through him.
Worshippers of God in his formless aspect like to meditate on the “Om” vibration, which is another vibhūti of God. Shree Krishna had declared previously, in verses 7.8 and 8.13, the syllable “Om” to be a sacred sound. It is the anāhat nād (the sound vibration that pervades creation). It is often present in the beginning of Vedic mantras for invoking auspiciousness. It is said that from the mono-syllable “Om” the Gayatri mantra was revealed, and from the Gayatri mantra, the Vedas were revealed.
The Himalayas are a mountain range lying at the north of India. Since ages, they have inspired spiritual awe and wonder in billions of devotees. Their atmosphere, environment, and solitude are conducive to the performance of austerities for spiritual progress. Thus, many great sages reside in the Himalayas in their subtle bodies, practicing penance for their own advancement and for the benefit of humankind. And so, of the multitude of mountain ranges in this world, the Himalayas best display his opulence.
Yajña is the act of dedicating ourselves to the Supreme. The simplest of all yajñas is the chanting of the holy names of God. This is called japa yajña, or the sacrifice of the devotional repetition of the divine names of God. For the practice of ritualistic yajñas, a number of rules are applicable, all of which need to be meticulously followed. However, in japa yajña, there are no rules. It can be done anywhere and at any time, and is more purifying than the other forms of yajñas. In the present age of Kali, the chanting of the names of God is even more emphasized.
kalijuga kevala nāma ādhārā, sumiri sumiri nara utarahiṅ pārā (Ramayan)[v28]
“In the age of Kali, the chanting and remembrance of the names of God is the most powerful means of crossing the ocean of material existence.”

