=== Bhagavad Gita: Chapter 7, Verse 10 ===


बीजं मां सर्वभूतानां विद्धि पार्थ सनातनम् |
बुद्धिर्बुद्धिमतामस्मि तेजस्तेजस्विनामहम् || 10 ||

bījaṁ māṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ viddhi pārtha sanātanam
buddhir buddhimatām asmi tejas tejasvinām aham


== Word Meanings ==

bījam — the seed
mām — me
sarva-bhūtānām — of all beings
viddhi — know
pārtha — Arjun, the son of Pritha
sanātanam — the eternal
buddhiḥ — intellect
buddhi-matām — of the intelligent
asmi — (I) am
tejaḥ — splendor
tejasvinām — of the splendid
aham — I


== Translation ==

O Arjun, know that I am the eternal seed of all beings. I am the intellect of the intelligent, and the splendor of the glorious.


== Commentary ==

In a cause and effect relationship, every cause is the seed of its effect. For example, an ocean is the seed of the clouds, and the clouds are the seed for rain. Similarly, Shree Krishna says in this verse that He is the cause (the eternal seed) from which all beings manifest.
Have you ever thought about why some people are more intelligent than others? Why do they have greater brilliance in their thoughts and ideas? The only explanation for this can be; since all that exists is a manifestation of God’s energy. The splendid qualities visible in such outstanding people can only be due to God’s grace. As Shree Krishna has mentioned in this verse, He is the subtle force behind the intelligent and the glorious. He makes their minds more analytic and thoughts scintillating.
Legend of modern history, such as William Shakespeare, displayed unmatched brilliance in the field of literature. That could have only been possible by God’s grace. His works have nourished English literature, and English has now become the most used language of the world. Swami Vivekananda once said: the British Empire has united the world in one language.
Another such genius is Bill Gates, who changed the course of information technology with his Windows Operating System. With more than ninety percent of market share, Windows has become the most popular Operating System in the world. As it is very user-friendly, it has made information technology available to the public at large. The usage of computers is not limited to IT engineers anymore. Such inspiration to have one major operating system to unify the information technology industry and ensure proper interaction could only be through God’s plan. God enhances one such person’s intellect when he wants to save us from chaos.
Of course, the saints have always acknowledged that the brilliance and beauty of their works are due to God’s special grace. Sage Tulsidas said:
na maiñ kiyā na kari sakauñ, sahiba kartā morkarata karāvata āap haiñ, tulasī tulasī śhor
“Neither did I write the Ramayan, nor do I have the ability to write it.  The Lord is my Doer.  He directs my actions and acts through me, but the world thinks that Tulsidas is doing them.”  Therefore, Lord Shree Krishna is indeed the ultimate source of all the brilliance and intelligence that manifests around us.

